AI900.md, before:

### AREAS OF FOCUS
1. Azure Cognitive Services -> Azure AI Services
2. Microsoft AI Foundry
3. AI Concepts
4. Knowledge Mining
5. Responsible AI
6. Basics of ML pipelines and MLOps
7. Classical ML models
8. AutoML and Azure ML Studio

### COMMON AI WORKLOADS
1. Anomaly Detection AI
   - Definition : finding outliers within a dataset
   - Azure Services:  Anomaly detector 
   - Use cases : Data Cleaning, Fraud detection, intrusion detection, systems health monitoring
     
2. Computer Vision AI
   - Definition : use ML to gain high-level
   - Azure Service : Computer Vision, Custom Vision, Face, Form recogniser
   - Algorithms : CNN, RNN
   - Use cases /Types : Image Classification, Object detection, semantic segmenation, Image Analaysis, OCR, Facial Detection
 
3. Natural Language Processing AI
   - Definition : ML that can understand context of text
   - Azure Service : Text Analytics, Translator, Speech Service, Language Understanding
   - Use Cases: analyze & interpret text within docs, sentiment analysis, speech synthesis, translate spoken or written phrases
     
4. Conversational AI
   - Definition : tech that can partifipate in conversations with humans
   - Use Cases : Chatbots, Voice Assisstants, Interactive Voice Recognition Systems
   - Azure Service : QnA Maker, Azure Bot Service



## AZURE COGNITIVE SERVICES (now: Azure AI Services)
- Defn: family of AI Services & APIs to help build intelligent apps i.e.: get started quickly, easy,resplonsible development & deployment
- Enables accsss to multiple AI Services with an API Key and Endpoint

**Service Types:**
1. Decision : Anomaly detector, content moderator, personaliser
2. Language : Language understanding, QnA Maker, Text Analytics, Transalator
3. Speech : Speech to Text, Text to Speech, Speech traslation, Speaker recognition
4. Vision : Computer vision, custom vision, face detect
   
#### 1. Knowledge Mining
- Combination of intelligent services t0 quickly learn from vast amounts of information
**Steps**
- Ingest : get content(structured or unstructured) from sources
- Enrich : with AI capabilities that let you extract information, find patterns 
- Explore : via search, bots, applications, data visulization

**Use Cases:**
- Content research: organizations need to review & research technical data
- Auditing, Risk, Compliamnce Management : help identify entities of importance from documents & flag important ideas
- Business Process Management : automate
- Customer Support & feedback analysis: find answer for a customer inquiry
- Digital asset management : search index documents
- Contract management :

#### 2. Face Service
- Provides AI algos that detect, recognize, and analyze human faces in images
- Azure Face can detect: faces in an image, faces with specific attributes, face landmarks, similar faces, same face as a specific identity
  
#### 3. Speech & Translate Service
- Azure Translate Service : Uses Neural machine translation
                          : Custom translator  to extend service based on business domain
- Azure Speech Service : speech synthesis service
  Features:
     - Speech to Text: real time, batch speech to text, multi device conversation, conversation transcription
     - Text to Speech : uses speech synthesis markup languge
     - Voice Assistance : integrates with Bot framework sdk
     - Speech recognition :  speaker verification & identification
   

#### 4. Text Analytics
NLP for text mining and analysis
   1. Sentiment analysis : apply labels and confidence score to text at sentence and document level
   2. Opinion mining : when provided with more granular data with a subject and opinion tied to a seniment
   3. Key phrase extraction : identify main concepts in text, works best with larger amounts of text
   4. Language detection
   5. Named Entity Recognition : detect words and phrases mentioned in unstructured data that can be associated with a semantic type ie: location, age, events, person, diagnosis
      
#### 5. OCR Computer Vision
- Extracting text  into a digital format
Azure has 2 APIs:
   1. OCR API - older, only images, executes synchronously, better for less text, more languages,easier to implement
   2. Read API - newer model, images and PDFs, executes asynchronously,  more text, fewer languages, difficult to implement

OCR uses computer vision SDK

#### 6. Form Recognizer  
- Specialized OCR service that preserves structure and relationship of form-like data
- It can identify : key-value pairs, selection marks, table structures
- Outputs: original file relationships, bounding box, confidence scores
Composed of : 
   - Custom models - trained with your own data. Two learning options: train without labels, train with labels
   - Pre-built models for invoices, receipts, business cards, IDs
   - The Layout models
#### 7. LUIS
Language Understanding - no-code ML service to build natural language into apps
Composed of a schema that is autogenerated which defines:
- Intentions - WHat user is asking for: Has NONE intention
- Entities - What parts of the intent is used to determine the answer
- Utterances - examples of user input that includes intent & entities to train ML model match predictions against real user input
  
#### 8. QnA Maker
- Enables conversational layer over your data based on knowledge base
  
  **Features**:
- Knowledge base : Imports content into a knowledge base of Question-Answer pairs. Stores text in mArkdown
- Chatbox : platform to converse with bot
- Chitchat : allows addition of a pre-populated set of the top chit-chat into knowledge based. Has about 100
- Layered Ranking System: data is stored in azure search(1st ranking layer), top results are passed into QnA Maker NLP re-ranking model to produce the final results and confidence score
- Multi-turn conversation : follow -up prompts and context to manage the multiple turns from one question to another
  
**Use cases:**
When you 
- Have Static Info : 
- Provide the same answer to a repeat request 
- Want to filter static info based on meta-information
- Manage a bot conversation that includes static info
#### 8. Azure Bot Service
- Intelligent, serverless bot for creating, publishing & managing bots
  
**Bot framework SDK**
- Open source SDK that enables developers model and build sophisticated conversations
- Bot framework composer : open source IDE to author, test, provision, manage conversational experiences

### MICROSOFT AI FOUNDRY(formerly Azure AI Studio)   
- PaaS for customizing language models 
- Collection of tools, services to build, manage  and use AI models, appications and agents at scale

**Core capabilities**
1. Foundry Models : model catalog that is a central hub to discover, compare and deploy models ~1800 models in catalog
   - Access to models ie : Azure OpenAI, 3rd party (Anthropic), Open Source(LLama)
   - Deploy models as agents
   - Manage lifecycle using version control     
2. Agent Service :
   - Playground with ready-to-use environment for testing ideas
   - Low code or code-first development of AI agents, built in integrations
3. Foundry Tools :
   - Build, test, demo and deploy tools for gen AI
   - Prebuilt azure services for Vision, Language, Speech, Document Intelligence, Content Safety
   - Accessible via: SDKs, APIs, Portal
4. Governance and Observability
   - Unified dashboard for performance metrics, safety checks, lifecycle monitoring
   - Evaluation - test for groundedness
   - Tracing - understand the flow, interactions between components
   - Safety + Security 
   - Continuous feedback loops
   - Ensures responsible AI through compliance, risk mitigation, identity management
  
  
**Features**
1. Pre-built models:
2. Secure access using APIs :  Resource Key, Endpoint. Keys have authentication headers

### GEN AI IN MS FOUNDRY
**Gen AI applications** 
- Apps built on language models that power app logic for user interaction to answer questions, create content, automate workflows
  
**Types of Gen AI Applications**
1. Assistants : chat-based tools integrated into apps ie: Microsoft Copilot
2. Agents : can reason, assess situations, take actions. Made up of LLM, Instructions, Tools ie: Executive Assistant agent

**Orchestration**
Coordinating models, data, tools and workflows into one unified solution


**Categorizing Gen AI Apps**
1. Ready-to-use
2. Extendable applications
3. Custom Applications



#### Serverless endpoint
#### Managed compute
####Interacting with gen ai
#### retirements
#### evaluations
#### tracing
#### fine tuning
#### distillation
#### inferencing api
#### safety
#### agents
#### orchestrators
#### azure ai search
#### hubs and projects
#### integration

Commit message:

Enhance AI900.md with new Foundry model details
Added sections on prompts, fine-tuning, distillation, and evaluators in Foundry.

AI900.md, after:

### AREAS OF FOCUS
1. Azure Cognitive Services -> Azure AI Services
2. Microsoft AI Foundry
3. AI Concepts
4. Knowledge Mining
5. Responsible AI
6. Basics of ML pipelines and MLOps
7. Classical ML models
8. AutoML and Azure ML Studio

### COMMON AI WORKLOADS
1. Anomaly Detection AI
   - Definition : finding outliers within a dataset
   - Azure Services:  Anomaly detector 
   - Use cases : Data Cleaning, Fraud detection, intrusion detection, systems health monitoring
     
2. Computer Vision AI
   - Definition : use ML to gain high-level
   - Azure Service : Computer Vision, Custom Vision, Face, Form recogniser
   - Algorithms : CNN, RNN
   - Use cases /Types : Image Classification, Object detection, semantic segmenation, Image Analaysis, OCR, Facial Detection
 
3. Natural Language Processing AI
   - Definition : ML that can understand context of text
   - Azure Service : Text Analytics, Translator, Speech Service, Language Understanding
   - Use Cases: analyze & interpret text within docs, sentiment analysis, speech synthesis, translate spoken or written phrases
     
4. Conversational AI
   - Definition : tech that can partifipate in conversations with humans
   - Use Cases : Chatbots, Voice Assisstants, Interactive Voice Recognition Systems
   - Azure Service : QnA Maker, Azure Bot Service



## AZURE COGNITIVE SERVICES (now: Azure AI Services)
- Defn: family of AI Services & APIs to help build intelligent apps i.e.: get started quickly, easy,resplonsible development & deployment
- Enables accsss to multiple AI Services with an API Key and Endpoint

**Service Types:**
1. Decision : Anomaly detector, content moderator, personaliser
2. Language : Language understanding, QnA Maker, Text Analytics, Transalator
3. Speech : Speech to Text, Text to Speech, Speech traslation, Speaker recognition
4. Vision : Computer vision, custom vision, face detect
   
#### 1. Knowledge Mining
- Combination of intelligent services t0 quickly learn from vast amounts of information
**Steps**
- Ingest : get content(structured or unstructured) from sources
- Enrich : with AI capabilities that let you extract information, find patterns 
- Explore : via search, bots, applications, data visulization

**Use Cases:**
- Content research: organizations need to review & research technical data
- Auditing, Risk, Compliamnce Management : help identify entities of importance from documents & flag important ideas
- Business Process Management : automate
- Customer Support & feedback analysis: find answer for a customer inquiry
- Digital asset management : search index documents
- Contract management :

#### 2. Face Service
- Provides AI algos that detect, recognize, and analyze human faces in images
- Azure Face can detect: faces in an image, faces with specific attributes, face landmarks, similar faces, same face as a specific identity
  
#### 3. Speech & Translate Service
- Azure Translate Service : Uses Neural machine translation
                          : Custom translator  to extend service based on business domain
- Azure Speech Service : speech synthesis service
  Features:
     - Speech to Text: real time, batch speech to text, multi device conversation, conversation transcription
     - Text to Speech : uses speech synthesis markup languge
     - Voice Assistance : integrates with Bot framework sdk
     - Speech recognition :  speaker verification & identification
   

#### 4. Text Analytics
NLP for text mining and analysis
   1. Sentiment analysis : apply labels and confidence score to text at sentence and document level
   2. Opinion mining : when provided with more granular data with a subject and opinion tied to a seniment
   3. Key phrase extraction : identify main concepts in text, works best with larger amounts of text
   4. Language detection
   5. Named Entity Recognition : detect words and phrases mentioned in unstructured data that can be associated with a semantic type ie: location, age, events, person, diagnosis
      
#### 5. OCR Computer Vision
- Extracting text  into a digital format
Azure has 2 APIs:
   1. OCR API - older, only images, executes synchronously, better for less text, more languages,easier to implement
   2. Read API - newer model, images and PDFs, executes asynchronously,  more text, fewer languages, difficult to implement

OCR uses computer vision SDK

#### 6. Form Recognizer  
- Specialized OCR service that preserves structure and relationship of form-like data
- It can identify : key-value pairs, selection marks, table structures
- Outputs: original file relationships, bounding box, confidence scores
Composed of : 
   - Custom models - trained with your own data. Two learning options: train without labels, train with labels
   - Pre-built models for invoices, receipts, business cards, IDs
   - The Layout models
#### 7. LUIS
Language Understanding - no-code ML service to build natural language into apps
Composed of a schema that is autogenerated which defines:
- Intentions - WHat user is asking for: Has NONE intention
- Entities - What parts of the intent is used to determine the answer
- Utterances - examples of user input that includes intent & entities to train ML model match predictions against real user input
  
#### 8. QnA Maker
- Enables conversational layer over your data based on knowledge base
  
  **Features**:
- Knowledge base : Imports content into a knowledge base of Question-Answer pairs. Stores text in mArkdown
- Chatbox : platform to converse with bot
- Chitchat : allows addition of a pre-populated set of the top chit-chat into knowledge based. Has about 100
- Layered Ranking System: data is stored in azure search(1st ranking layer), top results are passed into QnA Maker NLP re-ranking model to produce the final results and confidence score
- Multi-turn conversation : follow -up prompts and context to manage the multiple turns from one question to another
  
**Use cases:**
When you 
- Have Static Info : 
- Provide the same answer to a repeat request 
- Want to filter static info based on meta-information
- Manage a bot conversation that includes static info
#### 8. Azure Bot Service
- Intelligent, serverless bot for creating, publishing & managing bots
  
**Bot framework SDK**
- Open source SDK that enables developers model and build sophisticated conversations
- Bot framework composer : open source IDE to author, test, provision, manage conversational experiences

### MICROSOFT AI FOUNDRY(formerly Azure AI Studio)   
- PaaS for customizing language models 
- Collection of tools, services to build, manage  and use AI models, appications and agents at scale

**Core capabilities**
1. Foundry Models : model catalog that is a central hub to discover, compare and deploy models ~1800 models in catalog
   - Access to models ie : Azure OpenAI, 3rd party (Anthropic), Open Source(LLama)
   - Deploy models as agents
   - Manage lifecycle using version control     
2. Agent Service :
   - Playground with ready-to-use environment for testing ideas
   - Low code or code-first development of AI agents, built in integrations
3. Foundry Tools :
   - Build, test, demo and deploy tools for gen AI
   - Prebuilt azure services for Vision, Language, Speech, Document Intelligence, Content Safety
   - Accessible via: SDKs, APIs, Portal
   - Prompts 
   - Fine tuning : further train a pretrained model on a smaller, domain-specific dataset for better accuracy; updates weights and biases within the model; change             behaviour of model where system prompt is not sufficient.
   - Distillation : when another LLM creates training data for fine tuning an SML
   
  
4. Governance and Observability
   - Unified dashboard for performance metrics, safety checks, lifecycle monitoring
   - Evaluation - test for groundedness
   - Tracing - understand the flow, interactions between components
   - Safety + Security 
   - Continuous feedback loops
   - Ensures responsible AI through compliance, risk mitigation, identity management
  
  
**Features**
1. Pre-built models:
2. Secure access using APIs :  Resource Key, Endpoint. Keys have authentication headers

### GEN AI IN MS FOUNDRY
**Gen AI applications** 
- Apps built on language models that power app logic for user interaction to answer questions, create content, automate workflows
  
**Types of Gen AI Applications**
1. Assistants : chat-based tools integrated into apps ie: Microsoft Copilot
2. Agents : can reason, assess situations, take actions. Made up of LLM, Instructions, Tools ie: Executive Assistant agent

**Orchestration**
Coordinating models, data, tools and workflows into one unified solution


**Categorizing Gen AI Apps**
1. Ready-to-use
2. Extendable applications
3. Custom Applications


**How to customize models in Foundry**
1. Using Grounding Data 
2. Implementing RAG 
3. Fine-tuning 
4. Managing security and compliance - apply access, authentication and data usage policies to ensure compliance and prevent unauthorized/incorrect outputs

**Evaluators in Foundry**
1. Groundedness -align outputs with factual and contextual data sources
2. Fluency - natural language quality and readability
3. Relevance - how relevant is the response to user query
4. Coherence - assess logical consistency and flow of ideas
5. Content safety - comprehemsive check for harmful content



#### agents
#### orchestrators
#### azure ai search
#### hubs and projects
#### integration
